Having emotions and feelings is what separates us from animals and what makes us human. Without these qualities, we would be nothing but another barbaric species fighting to survive. Every decision humans make is driven from their emotional attachment to people, places, ideas, or objects.  

<h1>CONTENTION 1</h1>

Helping others is not a two way street. Everyday, people go out of their way to help those in need, even strangers. They do this out of the goodness of their hearts, not because they want or expect anything in return. For instance, if you help an old woman cross the street you will not receive any benefit besides a “thank you,” yet you still do it anyway. Because humans possess emotion, they have an innate desire to help others and make a positive impact on their lives.

According to research by David Rand at Harvard University, children and adults both have the initial impulse to help others. A recent study from the Max Planck Institute in Germany corroborates this claim and further analyzes infants, as they are the purest form of humanity because they are less influenced and corrupted by society. They measured infants’ pupil diameters and found that they decrease when they help others or when they see someone else helping. This indicates that infants are “not simply helping because it feels rewarding.” They are helping because of an “intrinsic motivation” and a genuine desire to provide benefit.

In addition, people will immediately help a sick or dying animal simply because they inherently want to, not for their own selfish gain. People know that animals cannot physically “pay them back” for any help provided, yet this does not stop someone from bringing a stray dog to the clinic or feeding a duck some bread. For humans to exhibit emotion and care for helpless animals proves that they do not act out of their own self interest; rather they go out of their way to make sacrifices for those in need.

<h1>CONTENTION 2</h1>

Think about your relationship with your loved ones, especially your parents. Parents dedicate their lives to their children - raising them, nurturing them, protecting them, and guiding them. They go above and beyond to provide everything for their kids, consequently sacrificing their own health, well-being, and happiness. I can 100% attest to the fact that my parents have done everything in their power to ensure a good life for my brother and I. My father continues to puts himself through brutal hours of work everyday without ever once complaining about his mental and physical suffering just for the sake of his children. If this isn’t the epitome of selflessness, I don’t know what is.

Not only do parents do this, but anyone with an established emotional connection to another person will tend to act selflessly to help those they care about. Everyday, friends and family go out of their way to help each other not for their own good, but because they genuinely care about the other person. This action is prevalent in every single human and is driven by one strong emotion: love.

<h1>CONTENTION 3</h1>

People will jeopardize their own safety and well-being for the greater good. They clearly do not expect anything in return for such noble actions, if anything, they are choosing to put themselves in the fire in order to make meaningful change. Recent history perfectly depicts human desire to help others despite the negative impact it may have on themself. Dr. Christine Blasey Ford came forward to inform the American public of the indiscretions of Brett Kavanaugh, the Supreme Court nominee at the time. Supreme Court Judge, the highest position of power in the country, is a prestigious honor and should be held by someone of great moral conduct. As Dr. Ford knew of Kavanaugh’s true character, she believed it was her civic duty to come forward with her story so Americans would know exactly who was to be elected. She had absolutely no political motive and no personal vendetta against him and actually risked her life, her job, and her reputation by stepping forward. She completely exposed herself to the judgement and criticism of the country, receiving accusatory calls and even death threats. However, she knew from the start what she was getting herself into. But instead of thinking of herself and protecting herself, Dr. Ford did what she did for the benefit of her country.

Clearly, humans are innately compassionate, and they possess a tendency to act altruistically towards others. They WANT to make a difference in people’s lives and society and they therefore often sacrifice themselves in the process. Rather than acting out of their own selfish interests, people are influenced by their emotions and relationships which leads them to make kind decisions for the benefit of others.